Adding FAQ on moving to v9-BETA from v8 (#19505)
microsoft/fluentui: packages/react-components/src/Concepts/MigratingFromV8.stories.mdx

import { Meta } from '@storybook/addon-docs';

<Meta title="Concepts/Developer/Migrating from v8" />

## Moving to v9-BETA from v8

> If you or your team are currently using version 8.x.x of our components and are thinking of transitioning to use our 9.x.x-beta components, then we would first like to thank you for making the jump and tell you how excited we are for you to experience all the improvements and things we have been working on for the past couple of months.

Author: Agreed, I'll remove them.

When we moved both `@fluentui/react` (previously `office-ui-fabric-react`) and `@fluentui/react-northstar` (previously `@stardust-ui/react`) under the same GitHub repository and Fluent UI banner we decided to take a deep look at how to best move the library forward. Although both propositions had so far served our customers well and delivered tremendous value, there were a number of issues with them that were hard to address. After numerous discussions on how to ease these customer pains and how to move everyone to one shared codebase we decided on a solution.

What we are delivering in version 9.x.x-beta are the first fruits of that decision.

Version 9 is a library built-up from the ground-up that addresses many of the concerns and issues that plagued version 8. However, because we have been building components from the ground-up the number of components that we are initially releasing in BETA is much smaller than the amount that existed in version 8. Some of them might also now exist under a different name.

Below is a list of the components that we are releasing with version 9.x.x-beta and what their respective equivalents are in version 8.x.x:

> | Component name in v9 | Equivalent component name in v8    |

Author: This is specifically for migrating from `@fluentui/react` v8.x.x, I'd expect a similar but separate document for migrating from `@fluentui/react-northstar`.

---

#### "I tried using the new components but there does not seem to be any styling applied to them. Am I doing something wrong?"

Components in version 8 could be used in isolation and still retain their default styling. For version 9, components require to be wrapped by `FluentProvider` and for a theme to be passed to it so that they are styled.

We recommend placing the `FluentProvider` at the root of your app so that everything gets styled appropriately. The theme to use if you are coming from version 8 is `webLightTheme`.

```jsx
import React from 'react';
import ReactDOM from 'react-dom';
import { FluentProvider, webLightTheme } from '@fluentui/react-components';

import App from './App';

ReactDOM.render(
  <FluentProvider theme={webLightTheme}>
    <App />
  </FluentProvider>,
  document.getElementById('root'),
);
```

---

#### "I managed to get the theme working but the components look different than they did previously, why is that?"

We our modernizing our components in version 9 to adhere to the latest guidelines in the Fluent Design Language. That is the reason of any visual differences you might notice.

---

> #### "What if I want to override a component's styles? Say, if I want to make them look like they did before? It seems like the styles prop does not exist anymore!"

Author: I double-checked because I really didn't know which one was the correct usage and it seems like putting it as one word is the correct thing to do here:

https://www.grammarly.com/blog/anymore-vs-any-more/

> #### "What if I want to override a component's styles? Say, if I want to make them look like they did before? It seems like the styles prop does not exist anymore!"

Reviewer: Huh okay, "anymore" still seems weird to me as one word in almost all contexts, but I guess that's just me 🤷‍♀️

The styling story in version 9 is very different to what existed in version 8. For one, we are moving away from providing a `styles` prop and are mostly focusing of providing styling via `classNames` (if you are worried about how could you style every piece of a component via `classNames`, do not fret and keep reading).

> We are also moving away from `mergeStyles` in favor of `makeStyles`, another in-house CSS-in-JS solution inspired by `stylex` that allows for things like atomic classes and build-time optimization of styles.

Author: I've added the link to the docs and removed the mention to `stylex`.

Well, there are actually a couple of things that have changed in version 9.

First of all, we are taking greater strides towards separating the concerns of a component into different files via the use of hooks. In version 8 there was already some semblance of that by separating things into the following structure for any given component:

- All type information in a `[ComponentName].types.ts` file.
- All styling information in a `[ComponentName].styles.ts` file.
- The rest of the component logic in a `[ComponentName].base.tsx` file.
- Bringing all of them up together in a `[ComponentName].tsx` file.

In version 9 the structure for a given component would be something more like:

- All type information in a `[ComponentName].types.ts` file.
- All rendering logic in a `render[ComponentName].tsx` file.
- All styling information in a `use[ComponentName]Styles.ts` file.
- All state management in a `use[ComponentName]State.ts` file.
- Providing defaults and resolving shorthands in a `use[ComponentName].ts` file (keep reading to learn more about what shorthands are).
- Bringing all of them up together in a `[ComponentName].tsx` file.

> In this way, we can actually maintain the separation of concerns we had for types and styling before while also separating the concerns of state management and rendering logic into their own individually reusable parts.

Author: The link on a the question below to the README on our composition utilities includes that information.

> Another added benefit in version 9 is that, because of the move to scaffolded packages, we are able to collocate all our component examples in their respective package next to the component's code instead of having them in the separate `@fluentui/react-examples` package.

Author: I've removed the mention of `benefit` and `because of the move to scaffolded packages` and just referred to the fact that we're collocating examples as a change in v9 to avoid adding the extra background that is probably not needed without having any inaccurate information in there.

---

#### "You mentioned something about shorthands, what is that?"

> For version 9 we are utilizing a new composition model to create our components. We have decided to name the building blocks of these components `slots` which, as their name suggests, are slottable parts that we put together to build the component. Most of the things that `render[ComponentName]` function calls return are slots.

Author: Will do.

> `Shorthands` are the way in which we allow these `slot` subparts within a component to be configurable. They allow a caller of the component to pass a variety of different inputs for a given `slot`, including but not limited to things like a string, JSX, an object or a function, depending on how the shorthand is configured.

Author: This is great, I'll definitely add this to the document.

| `Link`           | [`@fluentui/react-link`](https://github.com/microsoft/fluentui/tree/master/packages/react-link)           |
| `Menu`           | [`@fluentui/react-menu`](https://github.com/microsoft/fluentui/tree/master/packages/react-menu)           |
| `MenuButton`     | [`@fluentui/react-button`](https://github.com/microsoft/fluentui/tree/master/packages/react-button)       |
| `Popover`        | [`@fluentui/react-popover`](https://github.com/microsoft/fluentui/tree/master/packages/react-popover)     |
| `Portal`         | [`@fluentui/react-portal`](https://github.com/microsoft/fluentui/tree/master/packages/react-portal)       |
| `Text`           | [`@fluentui/react-text`](https://github.com/microsoft/fluentui/tree/master/packages/react-text)           |
| `ToggleButton`   | [`@fluentui/react-button`](https://github.com/microsoft/fluentui/tree/master/packages/react-button)       |
| `Tooltip`        | [`@fluentui/react-tooltip`](https://github.com/microsoft/fluentui/tree/master/packages/react-tooltip)     |

---

#### "Anything else I need to know about the file structure moving to the new version?"

> Well, there are actually a couple of things that have changed in version 9.

Reviewer 2: I would propose that we include this kind of information in a `CONTRIBUTING.md` or a `README.md` for v9 and simply link here, this kind of information does not belong in a migration guide IMO

Author: I think I will leave this here until we create those markdown files to link to but I agree that once we do we might want to just put this over there and link from here.

  <Button
    icon={{
      // wraps "icon" slot with a custom "div"
      children: (Component, props) => (
        <div>
          <Component {...props} />
        </div>
      ),
    }}
  />
</>
```

`resolveShorthandProps` and `getSlots` are some helpers that allow us to support and parse these dynamic _shorthand_ props.

Here are some other resources on the topic if you are interested:

- [README on our composition utilities](https://github.com/microsoft/fluentui/blob/master/packages/react-utilities/src/compose/README.md)
- [Slots API specification](https://github.com/microsoft/fluentui/blob/master/specs/Slots.md)

---

#### "Ok, that sounds good. Anything else I need to know?"

The FAQ above should cover most of the basics and link to other pieces of documentation for more in-depth reading.

For details about why different decisions were made on specific components refer to the `SPEC.md` file in each component's package.

For specific differences and how to move from a version 8 component to a version 9-BETA component refer to either the `Migration` section within the `SPEC.md` file or to the `MIGRATION.md` file itself in each component's package.

> Lastly, if you find something while playing with this new version that you thought should have made it into this FAQ, then please let us know as we very much appreciate your feedback and this is an evolving document.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Lastly, if you find something while playing with this new version that you thought should have made it into this FAQ, then please let us know through a github issue, we very much appreciate your feedback to our evolving documentation.
```

Should we be a bit clearer how they should get feedback to us ?

Author: Agreed! I've made this change
